A graph is  consists of nodes and edges.
n = nodes
e = egdes
path : path leads node "a" to node "b" through using one or 
       multiple egdes .
       The length of path = number of edges one node to another .
                          = sum of weigt of each edges involve in path ( weighted graph)
                          
Cycle : if first and last node is same .

Simple Path : if each node appears at most once in the path .
              so ,we can tell cycle can't be a cycle cause at cycle first and last node is same.
            
Connected Graph : if any there is a path between any two nodes. That means there is no single isolated node.
                   if there is single isolated nodes available on graph that is not a connected graph.
                   
The connected components of a graph are called its components.

Tree : A connected graph consists of n nodes and (n-1) edges .

Directed Graph : A graph is directed if the edges can be traversed in one direction only.
weighted Graph : A graph is weighted if every edges assigned a weight which can be it distance or anyting else.

Neigbours :   Two nodes are neigbours or adjacent if both are connected by a edge .

Degree : Degree of a node is the number of its neighbours.

EQn : 2 * Total edge = Sum of total degree .

Regular Graph : If the degree of every node is a constant.
Complete Graph : If the degree of every node is n-1 . That means every single node is connected to each other .

Indegreee & Outdegree : In directed graph , the number of edges that end at the nodes is Indegree of this node  and the 
                            number of nodes that start at the node is outdegree of that node .

Coloring : In coloring of a graph , each node is assigned a color so that no adjacent nodes have the same color .

Bipartite Graph : A graph  is bipartite of it is possible to color using two color only . That means if we 
                  can divide the nodes in two set , where memeber of same set has no edge , then it will be a bipartite graph.
                  Actually ,if any node's degeree is more than two , then this graph is not going to be bipartite graph .
                     
Simple Graph : if no edge starts and ends at same node and there are no multiple edges between two nodes , then it is a simple  graph.        
                

